#format rst
#language en

Discussion__

__ /Talk

.. contents:: Contents

This page describes the machinery used by the `Oekonux community`_.
This page is motivated by a `thread about this topic <http://www.oekonux.de/projekt/liste/archive/msg03333.html>`_ on the
`project list`_, which cares about the organization of the project.

The intention of this page is to reflect the current state of the
machinery. It is originally written in German which is available as
the first version of this page.

Overview
========

The `Oekonux community`_ currently uses the following technical
facilities:

* `mailing lists`_

* `web sites`_

* OpenTheory_

* `news groups`_

* Wiki_

As far as I know other facilities such as IRC are currently not used.

.. _oekonux server:

Dedicated Oekonux server
========================

There is a dedicated server for the Oekonux project. Currently this is
a virtual server based on Debian and hosted by `VD server`_. This
dedicated server is paid by the `Projekt Oekonux e.V.`_, a registered
association in Germany.

Today the server runs most of the technical infrastructure of the
project. It has a fixed IP address and the DNS entries for the domains
point to this server. The generic address of the server is
``server.oekonux.de``.

The general maintainer of this server is HolgerWeiss_, certain
facilities are maintained mainly by StefanMerten_.

In case it is necessary because the project needs more computing
resources a real server could be hosted by `Individual Network
Berlin`_.

Mailing lists
=============

Existing lists
--------------

The following lists exist:

* ``liste AT oekonux DOT de``

* ``list-en AT oekonux DOT org``

* ``projekt AT oekonux DOT de``

* ``chat AT oekonux DOT de``

* ``mitglieder AT oekonux DOT de``

* ``helfer AT oekonux-konferenz DOT de``

* ``referenten AT oekonux-konferenz DOT de``

For all mailing lists there are archives_, which are on the web sites
of the domain they belong to.

Hosting
-------

All mailing lists are hosted on the `Oekonux server`_. The mailing
lists are all served by a Majordomo_.

Features
--------

Spam protection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Mail to all mailing lists is routed over a SpamAssassin_. This is
indispensable because the addresses of the mailing lists have a wide
distribution.

The SpamAssassin installation needs some maintenance once in a while
to be ready for the latest ideas of spammers. This maintenance is done
by StefanMerten_.

Unfortunately the spam filtering does not catch all spam :-( .
Therefore the mailing lists have been closed so only subscribers can
post to the list unmoderated. The bounces of spam and legitimate mail
from non-subscribers are handled by StefanMerten_. All other tasks
necessary for keeping the mailing lists running are also handled by
StefanMerten_.

Web sites
=========

Hosting
-------

Provider
~~~~~~~~

There is no special provider for the web sites. All web sites are
hosted on the `Oekonux server`_.

Because of their size the audio files which mainly have been recorded
during the conferences are kept on web space donated by various
people.

Before conferences resources of the `OpenTheory project`_ are used
for online creation and presentation of the program of the conference.

Domains
~~~~~~~

There are four domains for which the `e.V.`_ is the owner:

* ``oekonux.de``

  Under ``www`` the German main page of the project can be found.

* ``oekonux.org``

  Under ``www`` the international main page of the project can be
  found.

  Also the Wikis are all hosted here:

  * ``en.wiki``

    The English language Wiki.

  * ``de.wiki``

    The German language Wiki.

* ``oekonux-konferenz.de``

  The German domain for everything around the Oekonux conferences.

  - ``www``

    Entry point for the most recent conference.

  - ``erste``, ``zweite``, ``dritte``

    Entry points for the respective conference.

* ``oekonux-conference.org``

  The international domains for everything around the Oekonux
  conferences.

  - ``www``

    Entry point for the most recent conference.

  - ``second``, ``third``

    Entry points for the respective conference.

More domains were present before the `e.V.`_ took them over but they
have been abandoned.

Features
--------

Web space
~~~~~~~~~

The audio files hosted externally sum up to about 4GB.

Traffic
~~~~~~~


.. $$$

There are statistics about the `network traffic <http://traffic.oekonux.de/>`_ and the `page hits
http://www.oekonux.de/projekt/statistik/website/`_.

Mail addresses
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All domains support a couple of mail addresses. They are mainly used
for the `mailing lists`_.

Besides the functional mail addresses there is only one private mail
address. Generally it is possible to create more private mail
addresses. Such private mail address must contain the family name of
the person.

Generation and Upload
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

At the moment all content of the web sites is generated by
StefanMerten_ on his private computer and uploaded onto the server.
Among other facilities the SDF format is used and the whole thing is
embedded in a ``make`` based automation.

.. important:: The sources for the static pages have been brought to a
   CVS repository eons ago. However, this has not been used.

   In general it would be good if a new solution for the web sites
   would be available by CVS. With this many people could work on the
   site.

   StefanMerten_ would appreciate that the sources of the web pages
   are created in a format close to ASCII - at best reStructuredText_.
   He is ready to provide a converter from the current format.

Static pages
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Apart from the Wiki pages nearly all pages in the Oekonux domains are
static HTML pages without any JavaScript or other active elements. By
this they are

* usable by *all* browsers

* readable for all times

* no security risk for the server

* stable URLs without variable parts

  Many search engines ignore links containing a ``?``.

* need no maintenance

* friendly to external search engines

  Though navigation is done by frames there is always a ``<noframes>``
  section which contains the links.

* can be downloaded with tools like ``wget`` completely and without
  problems

* works with every web hosting offer

Navigation
~~~~~~~~~~

Navigation is realized with frames. A narrow frame on the left is
modeled after a file browser. It permanently presents the current
position in the site. The right frame contains the selected content.
If a directory is selected in the navigation the content frame
``default.html`` always appears.

Apart from this each third level domain has a separate site map.

Links in all pages are followed by QBullets_ which roughly give the
type of the link.

Locale search engine
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~


.. $$$ Link ht://dig

Currently the local search engine is replaced by a ht://dig based
solution.

RSS-Feed
~~~~~~~~

.. important:: There is no RSS feed yet but it would be nice to have
   one.

Content
-------

General
~~~~~~~

.. important:: In general the sites are not maintained really. This is
   bad.

.. important:: In particular it would be good if the international
   site would have more of the content of the German site.
   Particularly it would be good to have the `Oekonux links`_ in
   English. Also the structure of the project should be presented on
   the international site.

Archives
~~~~~~~~

All `mailing lists`_ of the project are archived on the web sites.
StefanMerten_ converts the incoming mails to HTML by MHonArc_ and
uploaded automatically.

HTML pages for the archives are filtered. At the moment

* comments of MHonArc_ are removed

* phone numbers are replaced by a fixed text

* names of certain people who decided to late that they not want to be
  found in Oekonux by Google are shortened

* all URLs pointing to mail addresses are obfuscated a bit

* mail addresses are obfuscated

.. important:: There is a request to have the archives on the `web
   sites`_ in mbox format. For this it must be clarified what can be
   done against mail address harvesting.

Removal of archived pages is also widely automated. However, it needs
an explicit call with the number of the mail to remove.

.. important:: Right now the removed mail is removed only from the
   indexes but *not* from the server. By this it is no longer
   reachable by neighboring mails or an index but the are generally
   accessible. This must be changed.

Texts
~~~~~

Several texts of the project are available on the `web sites`_.

Among them is an introduction for which MagicPoint sources are
available.

Link page
~~~~~~~~~

One of the most important content resources of the `Oekonux
community`_ are the `Oekonux links`_, where interesting links are
entered with a short comment. The page is structured.

.. important:: It would be good if each of the `Oekonux links`_ would
   get a creation date. Meanwhile this would have some historical
   value.

   In general for existing links this would be possible by ``cvs
   annotate``.

.. important:: It would be useful if the language of the page behind
   the link would be given. This can be done by the HTML attribute
   ``hreflang``.

Statistics
~~~~~~~~~~

Statistics are available about the usage of the `mailing lists`_ as
well as about the `web sites`_ usage on the `web sites`_. All
statistics are created weekly by some Free Software (webalizer_,
mail2clf_, mail2chart_) automatically by StefanMerten_ and uploaded.

OpenTheory
==========

Many texts from the project and from its environment are available in
the `OpenTheory project`_. Some of them are gathered in the `Oekonux
OpenTheory project`_.

The texts are about Oekonux content as well as for organizational
purposes. In particular the conference preparation has been done
there.

Wiki
====

Currently there are two Oekonux Wikis at

* http://en.wiki.oekonux.org/

* http://de.wiki.oekonux.org/

They are based on the MoinMoin_ Wiki engine.

The content is maintained by a group of maintainers (`English <http://en.wiki.oekonux.org/MaintainerGroup>`_, `German <http://de.wiki.oekonux.org/MaintainerGruppe>`_ . The technical part
of the Wikis is maintained by StefanMerten_.

News groups
===========

Since end of 2003 the main discussion `mailing lists`_ are available
through Gmane_ as Usenet newsgroups:

* news://news.gmane.org/gmane.politics.oekonux.german

  Mirrors ``liste AT oekonux DOT de``.

* news://news.gmane.org/gmane.politics.oekonux.english

  Mirrors ``list-en AT oekonux DOT org``.

The newsgroups are configured in a way replies by news are not
possible.

.. important:: For now the newsgroup archives contain only those mails
   written after the newsgroup feature was in place. After the problem
   of readable mail addresses has been solved the whole archive shall
   be `brought <http://gmane.org/import.php>`_ to the newsgroup archive

Features
--------

Search engine
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Gmane_ has a search engine which searches the newsgroups.

.. ############################################################################

.. _restructuredtext: http://docutils.sourceforge.net/rst.html

.. _oekonux community: http://www.oekonux.de/

.. _project list: http://www.oekonux.de/projekt/liste/

.. _majordomo: http://www.greatcircle.com/majordomo/

.. _spamassassin: http://www.spamassassin.org/

.. _projekt oekonux e.v.:

.. _e.v.: http://www.oekonux.de/projekt/verein/

.. _opentheory project: http://www.opentheory.org/

.. _individual network berlin: http://www.in-berlin.de/

.. _qbullets: http://www.matterform.com/qbullets/

.. _mhonarc: http://www.mhonarc.org/

.. _oekonux links: http://www.oekonux.de/projekt/links.html

.. _webalizer: http://www.webalizer.org/

.. _mail2clf: http://www.merten-home.de/FreeSoftware/mail2clf/

.. _mail2chart: http://www.merten-home.de/FreeSoftware/mail2chart/

.. _oekonux opentheory project: http://www.opentheory.org/oekonux/

.. _gmane: http://gmane.org/

.. _vd server: http://www.vd-server.de/

.. _moinmoin: http://moinmoin.wikiwikiweb.de/

.. ############################################################################

.. LocalWords:  reStructuredText Premium page premium oekonux www org Hoster

.. LocalWords:  konferenz conference second third gehosteten MagicPoint Upload

.. LocalWords:  SDF make MHonArc Harvesting ToDo important JavaScript noframes

.. LocalWords:  wget pox Privacy Policy site default html Sitemap FreeFind you

.. LocalWords:  Perlfect clf Search webalizer mail mail chart Referrer co chat

.. LocalWords:  forum Kalka Chris Croome Gmane DOT list en mbox Subversion cvs

.. LocalWords:  StefanMn projekt helfer referenten gepollt Sympa SmartList rst

.. LocalWords:  MailMan buug SpamAssassin Individual Network vLinux server IRC

.. LocalWords:  Repository QBullets annotate hreflang OpenTheory Debian VD DNS

.. LocalWords:  HolgerWeiss StefanMerten mitglieder erste zweite dritte RSS

.. LocalWords:  MoinMoin
