.. include:: ../../header2.rst
.. include:: <html-roles.txt>

============================================
 reStructuredText Standard Definition Files
============================================
:Author: David Goodger
:Contact: docutils-develop@lists.sourceforge.net
:Revision: $Revision$
:Date: $Date$
:Copyright: This document has been placed in the public domain.

.. contents::


This document describes standard definition files, such as sets of
substitution definitions and interpreted text roles, that can be
included in reStructuredText documents.  The `"include" directive`__
has a special syntax for these standard definition files, angle
brackets around the file name::

    .. include:: <filename.txt>

__ directives.html#include

The individual data files are stored with the Docutils source code in
the "docutils" package, in the ``docutils/parsers/rst/include``
directory.


Substitution Definitions
========================

Many of the standard definition files contain sets of `substitution
definitions`__, which can be used in documents via `substitution
references`__.  For example, the copyright symbol is defined in
``isonum.txt`` as "copy"::

    .. include:: <isonum.txt>

    Copyright |copy| 2003 by John Q. Public, all rights reserved.

__ restructuredtext.html#substitution-definitions
__ restructuredtext.html#substitution-references

Individual substitution definitions can also be copied from definition
files and pasted into documents.  This has two advantages: it removes
dependencies, and it saves processing of unused definitions.  However,
multiple substitution definitions add clutter to the document.

Substitution references require separation from the surrounding text
with whitespace or punctuation.  To use a substitution without
intervening whitespace, you can use the disappearing-whitespace escape
sequence, backslash-space::

    .. include:: <isonum.txt>

    Copyright |copy| 2003, BogusMegaCorp\ |trade|.

Custom substitution definitions may use the `"unicode" directive`__.
Whitespace is ignored and removed, effectively sqeezing together the
text::

    .. |copy|   unicode:: U+000A9 .. COPYRIGHT SIGN
    .. |BogusMegaCorp (TM)| unicode:: BogusMegaCorp U+2122
       .. with trademark sign

    Copyright |copy| 2003, |BogusMegaCorp (TM)|.

__ directives.html#unicode

In addition, the "ltrim", "rtrim", and "trim" options may be used with
the "unicode" directive to automatically trim spaces from the left,
right, or both sides (respectively) of substitution references::

    .. |---| unicode:: U+02014 .. em dash
       :trim:


Character Entity Sets
---------------------

The following files contain substitution definitions corresponding to
XML character entity sets, from the following standards: ISO 8879 &
ISO 9573-13 (combined), MathML, and XHTML1.  They were generated by
the ``tools/dev/unicode2rstsubs.py`` program from the input file
unicode.xml__, which is maintained as part of the MathML 2
Recommentation XML source.

__ https://www.w3.org/2003/entities/xml/

===================  =================================================
Entity Set File      Description
===================  =================================================
isoamsa.txt_         Added Mathematical Symbols: Arrows
isoamsb.txt_         Added Mathematical Symbols: Binary Operators
isoamsc.txt_         Added Mathematical Symbols: Delimiters
isoamsn.txt_         Added Mathematical Symbols: Negated Relations
isoamso.txt_         Added Mathematical Symbols: Ordinary
isoamsr.txt_         Added Mathematical Symbols: Relations
isobox.txt_          Box and Line Drawing
isocyr1.txt_         Russian Cyrillic
isocyr2.txt_         Non-Russian Cyrillic
isodia.txt_          Diacritical Marks
isogrk1.txt_         Greek Letters
isogrk2.txt_         Monotoniko Greek
isogrk3.txt_         Greek Symbols
isogrk4.txt_  [1]_   Alternative Greek Symbols
isolat1.txt_         Added Latin 1
isolat2.txt_         Added Latin 2
isomfrk.txt_  [1]_   Mathematical Fraktur
isomopf.txt_  [1]_   Mathematical Openface (Double-struck)
isomscr.txt_  [1]_   Mathematical Script
isonum.txt_          Numeric and Special Graphic
isopub.txt_          Publishing
isotech.txt_         General Technical
mmlalias.txt_        MathML aliases for entities from other sets
mmlextra.txt_ [1]_   Extra names added by MathML
xhtml1-lat1.txt_     XHTML Latin 1
xhtml1-special.txt_  XHTML Special Characters
xhtml1-symbol.txt_   XHTML Mathematical, Greek and Symbolic Characters
===================  =================================================

.. [1] There are ``*-wide.txt`` variants for each of these character
   entity set files, containing characters outside of the Unicode
   basic multilingual plane or BMP (wide-Unicode; code points greater
   than U+FFFF).  Before Python 3.3, some distributions were "narrow"
   and did not support wide-Unicode characters. This should not be an
   issue nowadays.

For example, the copyright symbol is defined as the XML character
entity ``&copy;``.  The equivalent reStructuredText substitution
reference (defined in both ``isonum.txt`` and ``xhtml1-lat1.txt``) is
``|copy|``.

.. _isoamsa.txt:        ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/isoamsa.txt
.. _isoamsb.txt:        ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/isoamsb.txt
.. _isoamsc.txt:        ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/isoamsc.txt
.. _isoamsn.txt:        ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/isoamsn.txt
.. _isoamso.txt:        ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/isoamso.txt
.. _isoamsr.txt:        ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/isoamsr.txt
.. _isobox.txt:         ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/isobox.txt
.. _isocyr1.txt:        ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/isocyr1.txt
.. _isocyr2.txt:        ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/isocyr2.txt
.. _isodia.txt:         ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/isodia.txt
.. _isogrk1.txt:        ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/isogrk1.txt
.. _isogrk2.txt:        ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/isogrk2.txt
.. _isogrk3.txt:        ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/isogrk3.txt
.. _isogrk4.txt:        ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/isogrk4.txt
.. _isolat1.txt:        ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/isolat1.txt
.. _isolat2.txt:        ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/isolat2.txt
.. _isomfrk.txt:        ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/isomfrk.txt
.. _isomopf.txt:        ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/isomopf.txt
.. _isomscr.txt:        ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/isomscr.txt
.. _isonum.txt:         ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/isonum.txt
.. _isopub.txt:         ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/isopub.txt
.. _isotech.txt:        ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/isotech.txt
.. _mmlalias.txt:       ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/mmlalias.txt
.. _mmlextra.txt:       ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/mmlextra.txt
.. _xhtml1-lat1.txt:    ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/xhtml1-lat1.txt
.. _xhtml1-special.txt: ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/xhtml1-special.txt
.. _xhtml1-symbol.txt:  ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/xhtml1-symbol.txt


Role Definitions
================

Role definitions use the `"role" directive`_ to provide additional
`reStructuredText interpreted text roles`_.

.. _"role" directive: directives.html#role
.. _reStructuredText interpreted text roles: roles.html


.. _Additional roles for HTML:

Semantic Inline Markup Roles
----------------------------

The "html-roles.txt_" standard definitions file provides role
definitions for semantic `HTML inline markup elements`__ and
`tags for representation of edits to the document`__ that
do not have a corresponding standard rST role
(except for elements requiring an additional attribute).

The additional roles work out of the box with the `"html5" writer`_
(selects the corresponding HTML element) and the LaTeX writers.

.. _html-roles.txt: ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/html-roles.txt
__ https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/text-level-semantics.html
__ https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/edits.html

.. class:: field-indent-4em

:b:    highlight :b:`key words` without marking them up as important
:bdi:  text :bdi:`directionality` isolation [#attribute-optional]_
:del:  :del:`represents` removed content [#attribute-optional]_
:dfn:  :dfn:`dfn` represents the defining instance of a term
       [#attribute-optional]_
:i:    :i:`voix alternative`
:ins:  :ins:`editional` additions [#attribute-optional]_
:kbd:  user input like :kbd:`Ctrl X`
:mark: :mark:`highlight` a run of text
:q:    represents :q:`phrasing content quoted from another source`
       [#attribute-optional]_
:s:    text that is no longer accurate, :s:`or no longer relevant`
:samp: computer output like :samp:`hello world!`
:small: side comments :small:`like this`
:u:    unarticulated annotations of, e.g, :u:`mispellings`
:var:  variables (or constants like :var:`c`)

.. [#attribute-optional] Would gain from support for attributes/arguments
   to inline roles (see TODO_).

New in Docutils 0.22.

.. _TODO: https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/dev/todo.html
          #acronym-and-abbreviation
.. _"html5" writer: ../../user/html.html#html5


S5/HTML Definitions
-------------------

The "s5defs.txt_" standard definition file contains interpreted text
roles (classes) and other definitions for documents destined to become
`S5/HTML slide shows`_.

.. _s5defs.txt: ../../../docutils/parsers/rst/include/s5defs.txt
.. _S5/HTML slide shows: ../../user/slide-shows.html

.. Emacs settings

   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   mode: rst
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   End:
