.. include:: header.rst

=====================================================
EP 10 — Public API and Backwards Compatibility Policy
=====================================================

:Authors: Günter Milde, Adam Turner
:Discussions-To: https://sourceforge.net/p/docutils/feature-requests/89/
:Status: Draft
:Type: Process
:Created: 2025-04-22
:Docutils-Version: 0.23

:Abstract:
  This document suggests a definition of the public API provided by the
  Docutils project and the backwards compatibility policy.

.. contents::


Motivation
==========

.. Clearly explain why the existing specification is inadequate to
   address the problem that the proposal solves.

Docutils has a large user base and is used in production at several
places (Python documentation, Linux kernel documentation, CMake
documentation, readthedocs, ...). OTOH, Docutils has a version number
below 1.0 (widely seen as an indicator of "beta" status of a project).

The current `Docutils Project Policies`_ section on `version
identification`_ concentrates on the formal definition of the version
specifier but leaves open what consists a "major change in the design
or API".

The current `backwards compatibility policy`_ is a stub referencing
:PEP:`387`.


Rationale
=========

.. Describe why particular design decisions were made.

Clearly defining how we will balance evolution with stability is
important to both users and project developers.

People affected by changes in Docutils include:

.. class:: description

Authors
  writing or maintaining reStructuredText documents.

End-Users
  of the `Docutils front-end tools`_ (optionally with 3rd-party
  drop-in extensions) or alternative tools using Docutils either as a
  library (Sphinx_, …) or via the command line interface
  (build systems, Makefiles, scripts in other languages).

Developers
  i.e. authors and maintainers of

  - projects that use Docutils as a library (Sphinx_, rsted_, Leo_,
    Pelican_, ebookmaker_, MyST_, readthedocs_, rinohtype_, …),
  - drop-in components (pycmark_, rst2pdf_, rst2beamer_, …),
  - alternative front-end tools,
  - custom stylesheets (CSS style sheets, LaTeX styles, ODT styles),
    or
  - re-implementations of the `reStructuredText Markup Specification`_,
    e.g. Pandoc_ or Text-Restructured_ (prest).

A person may belong to more than one of these categories.

.. _Sphinx: https://www.sphinx-doc.org/
.. _rsted: https://github.com/anru/rsted
.. _Leo: https://leo-editor.github.io/leo-editor/
.. _Pelican: https://docs.getpelican.com/en/latest/
.. _MyST: https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/
.. _readthedocs: https://readthedocs.org/
.. _pycmark: https://github.com/pycmark/pycmark
.. _rst2pdf: https://rst2pdf.org/
.. _rst2beamer: https://docutils.sourceforge.io/sandbox/rst2beamer/
.. _rinohtype: https://pypi.org/project/rinohtype/
.. _ebookmaker: https://pypi.org/project/ebookmaker/
.. _PanDoc: https://pandoc.org/
.. _Text-Restructured: https://metacpan.org/dist/Text-Restructured


.. _specification:

Public API
==========

.. Describe the syntax and semantics of any new feature.

Docutils' public API includes:

* the `reStructuredText Markup Specification` [restructuredtext]_,

* `the Docutils Document Tree` [doctree]_
  and the `Docutils Generic Document Type Definition` [docutils.dtd]_,

* names, command-line arguments and behaviour of
  the *"console_scripts" entry points* [tools]_ [settings]_,

* the core ``docutils`` Python package API:

  - the "publisher" interface for programmatic use [publisher]_,

  - component interfaces as defined by the abstract base classes
    `docutils.readers.Reader`, `docutils.parsers.Parser`,
    `docutils.writer.Writer`, and `docutils.transform.Transform`,

* behaviour and names of *documented Python objects*,

* *output templates* and *style sheets* provided with the writers,

  .. template.txt, default.tex, titlepage.tex, xelatex.tex
  .. html4css1.css, minimal.css, docutils.sty (LaTeX), styles.odt

* the interface to custom stylesheets -- elements, macros and classes
  used by writers to represent Doctree_ nodes in the output format.

Exemptions:

* Python objects, stylesheets, and templates can "opt-out" of
  the public API with a docstring noting that the object is
  |provisional|_ or *internal*.
* All **undocumented** objects should be assumed to be internal. [#]_

.. [#] Cf. `Backwards Compatibility Rules`_ in :PEP:`387` and
       `Public and Internal Interfaces`_ in :PEP:`8`.
.. |provisional| replace:: *provisional*


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

.. Describe potential impact and severity on pre-existing code.

Beginning with version 1.0, Docutils will follow the rules of
`Semantic Versioning`_. All incompatible changes to the public APIs
require increasing the `major` part of the `version specifier`_.
Backwards compatible changes can be done in `minor` releases.


Security Implications
=====================

If required, critical bug fixes may change the public API without advance
warning.


How to Teach This
=================

.. How to teach users, new and experienced,
   how to apply the proposal to their work.

* Copy the backwards compatibility declaration to the `Docutils Project
  Policies`_. Link back to the `public API`_ specification in this document.

* Complete the API documentation and keep it up to date.

  - maintain and extend the `API Reference Material for Client-Developers`_

  - Fix/enhance/add docstrings to improve the output of `pydoc`_.

* Put the following text at a suitable place in the documentation:

     To find out if an object from the "docutils" package is safe to use,
     look up its docstring and the docstring of its parent(s) [#]_.

     If there is no documentation or the documentation says *provisional* or
     *internal*, the name, behaviour, and existence of the object is not
     guaranteed to be stable.

     Code relying on non-public objects should be made robust using
     public alternatives. If there is a no such alternative or the
     required change would be a problem, `contact the Docutils
     developers`__ or file a `feature request`_.

     .. [#] `Attribute docstrings`_ are not shown by pydoc_. To find out
        whether attributes have a docstring, check the source.

     .. _attribute docstrings:
         https://peps.python.org/pep-0258/#attribute-docstrings
     .. _pydoc: https://docs.python.org/3/library/pydoc.html
     __ https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/user/mailing-lists.html
     .. _feature request: https://sourceforge.net/p/docutils/feature-requests/


Rejected Ideas
==============

.. Why certain ideas that were brought while discussing this proposal were not
   ultimately pursued.

Use type annotations as an indication of status in the public API.

- There is no known precedence for this approach.
- Type annotations may be helpful also for non-public code.

Use Calendar Versioning (CalVer).

- Would be a break from current versioning without clear advantages.

Allow breaking API changes in *minor* versions after prior announcement
and a deprecation period.

- Breaks the principle of least surprise.

Mark all internal objects with a prefix underscore.

- May needlessly break applications using internal objects.

Use the ``__all__`` attribute to declare modules, classes, and
functions that form the public API.

- This may be done later to improve "pydoc" output, but should not hold
  up the declaration of a Backwards Compatibility Policy.


Open Issues
===========

.. Any points that are still being decided/discussed.

* Differentiate between "core API" and "extended API"?

  There are many objects that were not intended for public use but are
  still used by downstream projects.

  Cf. the `Docutils Project Policies`_

    When Docutils reaches version 1.0, the major APIs will be considered
    frozen.

    The major number [...] may be incremented later if there is a major
    change in the design or API.

* Define a minimum deprecation time similar to DocBook?

    A "major" release […] may contain backward-incompatible changes if:

    * the change was announced in the release notes for the previous
      version (major or minor) and
    * the change was announced in a release that occurred at least six
      months previously.

    By these rules, the technical committee can announce, in 5.1,
    for example, plans to make a backward-incompatible change in 6.0.
    Then, in 6.0, if it’s been at least six months since 5.1 was
    released, they can make that change.

    --- https://tdg.docbook.org/tdg/5.1/ch01.html#bwcompat

* Generate API documentation with Sphinx?

  - nicely format rST docstrings
  - include attribute docstrings (ignored by pydoc_).


References
==========

.. A collection of URLs used as references through the proposal.


.. [doctree]      `The Docutils Document Tree <../ref/doctree.html>`_
.. [docutils.dtd] `Docutils Generic DTD <../ref/docutils.dtd>`_
.. [publisher]    `The Docutils Publisher <../api/publisher.html>`_
.. [tools]        `Docutils Front-End Tools <../user/tools.html>`_
.. [restructuredtext] `reStructuredText Markup Specification
                      <../ref/rst/restructuredtext.html>`_
.. [settings]     `Docutils Runtime Settings <../api/runtime-settings.html>`_
.. [transforms]   `Docutils Transforms <../api/transforms.html>`_

.. _API Reference Material for Client-Developers:
    ../index.html#api-reference-material-for-client-developers
.. _Docutils Design Specification: ../peps/pep-0258.html
.. _Docutils Project Policies: ../dev/policies.html
.. _version specifier:
.. _version identification:
    ../dev/policies.html#version-identification
.. _backwards compatibility policy:
    ../dev/policies.html#backwards-compatibility-policy
.. _HISTORY: ../docutils/HISTORY.html
.. _RELEASE-NOTES: ../docutils/RELEASE-NOTES.html

.. _`Backwards Compatibility Rules`:
    https://peps.python.org/pep-0387/#backwards-compatibility-rules
.. _`Public and Internal Interfaces`:
    https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/#public-and-internal-interfaces
.. _provisional: https://docs.python.org/3/glossary.html#term-provisional-API

.. _Semantic Versioning: https://semver.org/


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
